Hyphenation
===========

Hyphentation is conformed to comply with standard modern hyphenation rules as suggested by:

* the Oxford English Dictionary
* the usage in the Revised English Bible
* the Economist Style Guide (at http://www.economist.com/research/styleGuide/index.cfm?page=738537)

Numbers such as twenty-three are hyphenated.

These choices are likely to require revisiting in adjusting the text for common American usage.

This is not a comment on the suitability of these words and phrases but is only a grammatical exercise.

Hyphens removed:

Anti-Christ		Antichrist
back-biting		backbiting
bed-ridden		bedridden
busy-bodies		busybodies
by-standers  	bystanders
co-heir(s)		coheir(s)
corn-fields  	cornfields
court-yard		courtyard
fore-shadowing	foreshadowing
freed-man		freedman
good-bye        goodbye
good-will		goodwill
grand-child		grandchild
hundred-fold  	hundredfold
inn-keeper  	innkeeper
life-blood  	lifeblood
market-place	marketplace
merry-making	merrymaking
mid-day			midday
mill-stone 		millstone
money-lender 	moneylender
mountain-side  	mountainside
new-born		newborn
new-comer		newcomer
over-reaching	overreaching
race-course		racecourse
re-crossed  	recrossed
Re-Dedication	Rededication
road-side		roadside
stand-point		standpoint
three-fold		threefold
to-day			today
to-morrow		tomorrow
to-night  		tonight
up-rooted		uprooted
white-washed	whitewashed


Hyphenated words made into two words:

angel-worship		angel worship
Assistant-Officer	Assistant Officer
birth-pains		    birth pains
burnt-offerings  	burnt offerings
corn-measure		corn measure
ever-increasing	    ever increasing
fellow-Christian	fellow Christian
fellow-citizen  	fellow citizen
fellow-disciples	fellow disciples
fellow-guests  		fellow guests
fellow-Jew			fellow Jew
fellow-men			fellow men
fellow-officer  	fellow officer
fellow-prisoner		fellow prisoner
fellow-servant		fellow servant
fellow-soldier  	fellow soldier
fellow-townsman		fellow townsman
fellow-traveller	fellow traveller
fellow-voyagers		fellow voyagers
fellow-worker		fellow worker
food-supply			food supply
half-an-hour  		half an hour
harvest-time  		harvest time
ill-feeling	    	ill feeling
ill-treatment   	ill treatment
joint-heirs  		joint heirs
law-courts			law courts
least-esteemed  	least esteemed
long-hidden	    	long hidden
loving-kindness	    loving kindness
market-house		market house
money-changer		money-changer
mustard-seed    	mustard seed
newly-made			newly made
palm-branches		palm branches
police-officer		police officer
Presiding-Officer	Presiding Officer
sister-church      	sister church
state-robes			state robes
tax-office			tax office


Hyphenations retained:


all-embracing
all-glorious
all-merciful
all-prevailing
awe-struck
Baal-zebub
bare-headed
bean-pod
birth-pangs
blood-money
blood-red
breast-plate
bridal-hall
burial-ground
child-bearing
conscience-smitten
corner-stone
corrupt-minded
country-side
covenant-blood
cross-roads
daughter-in-law
day-time
down-dropped
dwelling-place
earthly-minded
empty-handed
ever-blessed
ever-living
evil-disposed
evil-doer
eye-witness
faint-hearted
father-in-law
fig-tree
figure-head
filthy-minded
first-born
first-fruits
fortune-telling
foster-brother
god-fearing
hand-mill
hard-drinking
high-born
High-Priestly
hill-country
hill-side
holy-minded
house-top
humble-minded
hyssop-stalk
idol-offerings
ill-ordered
ill-treat
ill-treated
ill-treating
ill-used
ill-will
incense-altar
kind-hearted
lamp-stand
lecture-hall
life-giving
long-appointed
long-suffering
love-feast
lowly-minded
mid-heaven
money-making
moth-eaten
mother-in-law
north-east
north-eastern
open-handed
passer-by
passers-by
peace-loving
pigeon-dealer(s)
pre-arrange(d)
Preparation-Day
pure-minded
re-establish
roosting-place
Sabbath-Rest
sea-monster
sea-shore
self-accusation
self-assertion
self-commendation
self-condemned
self-control
self-defence
self-glorification
self-imposed
self-indulgence
self-restraint
self-seeking
self-willed
shadow-land
sheep-gate
short-lived
simple-hearted
simple-minded
slave-dealer
slave-woman
so-called
spiritually-minded
stumbling-block
tax-gatherer
temple-rate
tent-making
threshing-floor
true-hearted
Trumpet-Blasts
trumpet-call
turtle-dove
two-edged
vine-grower
wallowing-place
water-jar(s)
wedding-robe
well-instructed
well-known
well-versed
wide-spread
winding-sheet
wine-cup
wine-drinker
wine-press
wine-skin
winnowing-fan
worldly-minded
wrong-doer
wrong-headed
Zeus-beyond-the-Walls
